check this in just a minute and see if we are. Okay,
if you'll begin by telling me your name and where
you were born. Well, I was born in Musquis,
Coahuila, Mexico. And my name was given to me was
Guadalupe Garza. Then my mother and my daddy come
to the United States in In August the 26th, 1926, we
passed through Eagle Pass. And since then, we've
been given in the United States. Yeah, I mean in
Texas since then. And then we grew up over here in
the, what you call, the brass bottom. And we went to
school over there. We were 12 in the family, six
boys and six girls. And my daddy was... farmer or
agriculture, we used to plant cotton, corn in the
fields, and we used to help them during the, not
during the school period, but during the harvest,
we used to help them and pull the cotton, pick the
cotton, and then my, every year, you know, at the
end of the year, my daddy will equalize the whole
crop and then give them money, But I think those
days were happy days to us. And all of my brothers
and sisters, we all went to school. We got all that
good education. I mean, not high school, but some
got towards ninth grade, 10th grade, in those
days. And I think that was good. And so all my family
moved to the state of Oklahoma. And they all live
over there except me. I live here. But then I got
married in 1942. I got married to Mr. Medina. And
then we... What is his first name? Julio. Julio
Medina. Julio C. Contreras Medina. And he works at
the MSC as a cook. He's doing a little vacation in
Mexico. Oh, yeah. Yeah, he's there. They called
this morning from... from close to Monterrey. My
daughter and my son-in-law, they went over there.
So then my daddy, before he come to the United
States, he was born in Muscas, also in the same
state and the same city we were born. What did his
father do in Muscas? That would be your
grandfather.
I really don't remember, but I believe in those
early days. Before the Revolution. Before the
Revolution. I guess all of it was like a farmer, you
know. They have their little crops and all that.
Did they have their own land? Well, they never did
mention no land, but I think they were not well off.
But they were, you know, just making a living
somewhere over there in Mooskies. And so, I
remember my grandfather. I remember him and my
grandma. I remember both. And I remember when
grandpa, in 1934, no, it's 1932, my
father-in-law, my grandfather, his name was
Martiniano Garza, he passed away. And I remember
to this day, I was about six years old, but I
remember that they make a casket, you know, with
some new boars, and they put some linen, and all
this means put in a wagon. And we took him, and he was
buried over here at Snoop. No, Tunis. That's where
he's buried. Then in 1934, Grandma passed away,
and we did the same thing. And I still remember the
roll and the wagon and everything. You know, the
funerals those days, we didn't even touch no
ambulance, no nothing. We just made our own
funeral. But I remember seeing the father,
because they were Catholic. I remember the father
went and gave her the blessing. I remember that
real good, because they took the father from here
to Bryant, to the farm, and he gave all the church
rights, and then she passed away that day, and then
the father said, well, and nobody complained, and
nobody said nothing, no ambulance, no nothing,
but it was this wagon. I remember we were little. We
all climbed on the wagon. And they had about four or
five wagons, of course. All the people from the
same, these men that called themselves Porres,
they owned all those lands over there. So we took
one more over there into the graveyard. But I still
remember that this minister took part in the
service of the graveyard. And he read the rights.
But then I was seven years old. I remember then. I
remember then when he got some dirt and say, ashes
to ashes and all that. And I know that man to date,
but I never had the knowledge or the thinking to
tell him that I know him, that he went and performed
a run ball field. But I don't know what happened.
Every time I wanted to tell him something, it had to
happen. But I really wanted to tell him that he was
the one that went over there. But I don't know who I
am. I kind of put it off every time I get a
conversation. I want to tell him, but I don't know.
I have to go and tell him that he was the first man
that I... that I heard say something about God or
something, like that other Bible or something.
Because we, all the background, we didn't have no,
we never did go to church. Nobody teach us nothing.
Nobody say nothing. We were just living in the
farm, you know, way far from the other people. We
didn't know nobody. Yeah, but your family was
Catholic at that time. Yeah, my family was
Catholic, so the priest went over there. But in
Mexico, my father was a, well, he was a, I think his
rank was a cap in the military service. But you see
that their Revolution War was bad. Well, let's
begin kind of at the beginning. What year was your
father born? Well, I don't remember that. How old
is he now? He's 89. He's 89 now. I think he was born
about 1870.
He was born in the early 1880s. So when the
Revolution came, he was probably in his late 20s or
early 30s. Yeah, he was. Well, when my daddy
entered the service, he said he was just 12 years
old. Was he in the Army before the Revolution? No,
but he had some military background. He had some
military background before it happened. By 12, he
was already a military man. And was he then in the
Dias troops, the federal troops? Something like
that, but he got to know Pancho Villa, that's for
sure. And I wish he was here, I'd ask him, and he'd
tell me, yes, I know Pancho Villa, you know, in
person. He always tried to describe us, the men,
but we just He didn't believe and didn't think this
was too serious. And we told him that what kind of a
man was he. And he said, oh, he was a, what you call
it, go-getter. He was a mean man. He said, yeah,
that's one thing they have to say, that he was a mean
man. Because if things don't go his way, he'd kill
anybody. No matter if it was a kid or a little girl or
a boy or a woman or anybody. A man, it didn't make him
no bigger. And your father was a soldier with
Villa? No, my father was a soldier, but this is
Pablo González. Pablo González. Pablo González.
Yeah, Pablo González. And now I've been reading a
little history, and I see those names, but I don't
know who the person was. But he was Pablo González
and another by the name of Huerta. Victoriano
Huerta, and your father was with Huerta and
Gonzales. Every time he said Pablo Gonzales, he
was his captain or something, but my daddy had a
good military background in military service. He
was actually fighting against Villa. Well, yes,
he was fighting against Villa because he died
thinking that he was doing right. But he said, no,
he was not doing right, because he killed more
people, innocent people, than people that really
need to be killed. Because my daddy said that,
well, we always ask, well, why are y'all the same
nation, the same people? Why did y'all have these
fights against each other? He said, well, because
we were fighting against the government, against
the government, because the government didn't
treat the nation right, because They didn't look
for the poor or they didn't help the poor. And then I
asked the question, how much money did you earn?
About a month or a week. Nobody had no payroll. They
had to go up to the cities and rob the banks and the
stores and give things what they needed. Of
course, they had the power because they had guns
where they wouldn't grab anything to eat. They'd
go through fields and ranches and all that thing.
They'd kill cows and make still barbecue there and
then eat it and then take off to another time but he
said the main thing we did and we know that we did he
said fight it against the government because he
they they was not treating the people right he said
if the family was living over here and having two or
three girls if a man abused one of the girls there
was no law instead of helping well they they come
and take your son you just because you told that i
did wrong your son will go to the what you call it
what you call to the government federal what you
call the federal government they they shaved his
head uh hair off and put her what you call a cap and
that was the as my father said that was the the
hardest task the nation took because if you got a
son and he didn't commit no crimes Why did he have to
go serve to the government? Because somebody else
did a crime. You see, and that way the nation, the
poor people was, you know, intimidated. That way
they can, if there is something wrong to your
family, you can't say to the public. If somebody
did something to your family, just keep it to
yourself, or else they're going to get one of your
boys. And my daddy said, well, that was that. This
was the thing that the nation, the people, the
federal government did wrong. They did wrong. But
the revolution, Villa fought. He was fighting. He
said he was fighting against that. Yeah, he
thought, you know, he died thinking. And, you
know, I saw that way late, way, my daddy had a book.
And I don't know, he still got that book. And I can
see the man. And I can recall the bed where he was
laying. But I don't know if he got the book yet. But I
see the wounds, you know. It was in black and white.
I can see the wounds. And it was a big, heavy-set
man. Heavy-set like Joe Stalin. With big
mustache. Yeah, that was the year when he was
killed. Yeah, he was wounded. And they had him in
some kind of bed. But I remember that book. I don't
know if he got it. I'm going to. I'm planning to make
a trip this summer, and I'm going to get involved
into all those details. See if I can get the book and
get some pictures out of it. How many years did your
father fight all together? Oh, he fought about, I
think about, he said the war started the 12th, the
8th or 9th, 8th or 9th, 10th, 11th, 12th, 13th,
14th. I think he said about six or seven years.
before everything come to the conclusion, you
know, because he said that the federal government
had everything under control. They had arms, they
had rifles, they had a lot of everything. But he
said that he think that Spain had a lot to do with
that. Spain, because once Mexico was under
Spain's rule, you know, the rule, and then he said
all the the most of the money and most of the gold,
the Spanish people, the Spaniards from Spain took
it. And they believed that the more people that got
involved in this was the priests, because all the
pilgrims, all the people from the church took the
gold and took everything to the church, and then
the priests, when they fled out of the country,
they took all that money. So my father said that
that he believes those people did wrong, too, to
the nation. And they said that's why Mexico
learned a lesson, but it was kind of hard because
they have to kill each other thinking. Like my
father-in-law was telling me the other day, he
said, you know, in one time, a son was fighting
against his father until they would meet each
other with a rifle. He said, well, you're my
father. And they didn't shoot each other, but he
said there was almost one against each other. And
he said the main thing they was fighting for equal
rights, equal rights, because he said that they
want everything equal, not because somebody
committed a crime, somebody else have to pay. If I
got hurt, well I have supposed to, I mean, if I got
hurt, the people that hurt me, have to pay for what
he did. Not my son, that he didn't do anything. But
you see, they had this thing so good with the
government that my boy have to pay for the crime
that other men commit. He said it was a married man.
Well, he had a family. He had something to get along
by. But not my son. Well, you ain't got no. Just
because you told authorities this, your son will
pay for that. And this, when all the poor people got
against us, they said, no, the innocents always
have to pay. We can't do that. What did your mother
do the whole time your father was fighting? Well,
you see, all the ladies stayed at home. In Muscas?
Uh-huh, Muscas. Was there ever any fighting in
Muscas? No, my mother used to tell us that the...
Well, I went to Monterey, yeah, to Monterey, and
that's the, the mosque is not too far from
Monterey. Well, she used to talk about some
mountains. She said he hear the, you know, when
they shoot the canyon, she used to hear the, you
know, the booms. And now that I saw that, I said,
well, the fighting was near that, but I never did
get close to that mountain where they were
fighting, but it's still there. And my mother used
to say, I never did went to no war. I never see, well,
she never did see nobody fighting with the guns.
Now that's what she told me. But she said that one
day that, that you can see the dust from the horses
that were coming toward the town. And so they
yelled that, you know, they had somebody to be
looking, like a guard, you know, looking and
yelled that they were coming. So they flew, flew,
flee to the mountain. And my mother said, and I took
my shoes and she said she lost her shoes on the way to
the mountain because she said that they had a sheet
and they, all the good things they put in the sheet
and they, uh, wrap it up and took it they found a hole
and put it there so that i think they went all the way
over there and they got it because they they didn't
stop they keep uh you know walking through the
other side of the mountain get as far as they could
get so my mother said you know she said they must
have had her fighting before there because he said
there was a man standing over there with a big fire,
you know, a big fire. And my mother said she could
see some fingers on that pile of wood they had over
there. She said she was a little girl. She said she
had her shoes like these, you know, and his arm and
shoulder. And she was walking to a little trail
over there. You know, a smoke and a big old, she
thought it was wood, but it was not wood, it was the
people. It was people. They were burning the
people, yeah. Who was burning them? This man,
this, you know, people from the, what I said, from
the farm, you know, from the little village that
live over there. Because you say, you know, all
that, all that odors will bring a... Oh, they were
people who were already killed. Yeah, they were
burning the bodies. They were burning the bodies.
And then I asked my mother, why did they dig a grave?
My mother said, it would take a lifetime to dig a
grave because there were rocky mountains over
there. There was nothing but rocks. And they
didn't have enough men to dig a big hole. You know,
just like a pole. She described a pole, you know,
like a like when you put some cut on the floor, you
know, about a bale of cut. He said, that's how much
the power was. Now, my mother said, and they put a
lot of branches and a lot of wood, and she think they
put gasoline or kerosene, a lot of kerosene in it,
so they can burn the whole thing. But she said, when
I passed through there, she said, I can see some
fingers, you know, the fingers of the men, and the
hands. And this man had a fork made out of wood, He
said he was wrecking all that meat to that pile, so
everything get burned. And she said, I remember, I
was a little girl then when that war, but I don't
remember what year, because she never told us what
year, but she used to tell us about that ugly war.
She said, and you know what? She said, when I saw
that, I asked my aunt, because she was a premature
baby. She never had no... no sisters and no
brothers from her side, because she was born, what
you call a premature baby, and her grandma raised
her here on her chest. That's a little bit of her,
and so his daddy got married with another woman,
and she said, and then they give it to this, her
godmother and godfather, she said, they raised
me. But every time those federal people come, we
have to run, make a run to the mountains, because if
they ever catch us, they kill us. Did they run when
the revolutionaries came, too? No, no. Just when
the federals came? Yeah, when the federal
government came. And my mother said that this is
the same revolution, I think, but this is what they
were looking for, this man by the name of Manuel.
Manuel Garduña. They claimed that he was a big, you
know, bandit or robber or something like that.
Well, my mother said that she was my older sister,
they was, you know, making some tortillas like
they used to do in their little thing, what you call
it? Metate. Metate. And she was, and she said by the
time this Garduña was there, his uncle and his
cousin was there in that house where my mother
lived. In Musques. Yes, close to the mountain in
Musques.
And he said they saw the people coming, but they
knew that there was not a They were not the federal
government. They were what they called the
civilians, but they were still civilian
warriors. They approached the little house. My
mother told Manuel, you better go, because
they're coming after you. And he said, no. No, he
didn't make a way, because he said, I'm not guilty
of it. They just claimed those things, but I'm not.
I'm not guilty of it. He said, but the old man, his
uncle, It was no wiser than him because he said, all
the soldiers surround the house and they were just
cleaning their rifles and everything. He said,
listen, we're going to stay here a little while.
Y'all better get busy and make a lot of tortillas.
And we got some meat over here y'all can cook. And he
said, my sister and another lady and my mother
started cooking for those men. And they went and
bring some wood, some more wood, because they had
no stoves. Now, mother, they had no stoves until
she moved over here to Texas. They didn't know what
a stove looked like. They cook outside an open door
and some bricks or some rocks. A hearth on the
ground? Uh-huh, on some rocks. And so mother said,
they told the men to get away from there. He said,
no, I'll stay here. And then their uncle, who was a
soldier, was standing here in the door like that
with his rifle. And that man said, excuse me, I'm
going to bring the wood for the lady. And so he
jumped the soldier and took a little trail to the
wood. He never did come back. But his mother said,
there was another little tree. She said, and us
thought that this man was cruel with this other man
because those days they didn't have no mercy. They
didn't give you a chance or they didn't give you a
trial. They just what you call lynch the man or just
everybody just jump on you and if you were guilty or
not, you have to pay for whether somebody else say.
So mother said that this man got a rope and put it
over the branch of the tree and got this man neck and
pulled it. My mother said that man took his tongue
about that much. about a foot out of his mouth. He
said, you don't realize how big your tongue is
until you spill it out. You know, mother used to
tell us a lot of stories, and we'd get scared. I
said, mother, why didn't you all call the law? He
said, what law? There was no law, kids. There was no
law. We didn't have no law and no order. There's a
reason we come to the United States to look for a
better chance to live, because You couldn't tell
nobody over there the law. Well, the law was more
dirty than the other. There was no law. And so he
said that man. And then one of the soldiers, one of
the assistant soldiers told the captain, don't do
that. Give him a chance. Maybe he'll talk down the
way they claimed they took him for a trial. But he
didn't get over there, because they kill him for
the reward. They sure believe in the reward.
Mother said that on those days anybody do
something, they didn't think about the life of the
man, they didn't think about their personality,
nothing. What they think is about the reward they
was going to receive, no matter how they get it, but
they get it. When did your mother and father get
married? Well, they never told us nothing about
that. We were too young, I guess, or something. We
just... They never did ask, no. We were kind of...
We never did ask, but my mother, when she passed
away, she was 63 or 65 years. 63 or so, and she died in
what year? In 1960. In 1960. So she was quite a bit
younger than your father, probably. Yes, she was
younger than my dad. She was younger, but you see,
those couples in those days, they didn't have
any... any protection like they got on these days
and the family was just a what you call it they just
come handy one baby after another that's why
mother had so many babies she had seven girls and
six girls and six boys and out of those six boys and
six girls that's one boy is dead and one we still
live in ten boys and i mean five boys and five Well,
that's really remarkable for those days that all
the children, or nearly all of them, lived. And
they were healthy children. I never did remember
that one went to the hospital or had tonsils or
stomach aches. We were just raised on the farm, you
know, like a... Who was the oldest child in your
family? Well, my oldest sister, but she passed
away. That's the one I remember her. Her name was
Alec. She passed in 1935. Do you know when she was
born? No, I don't remember. I remember one of the
girls was born in 1922, and another 1923, 24, and
25. That's me. You were born in 25. And my other
little brother was born in 26. Yeah, the one that's
a minister, he was born in 26. Yeah, every year, you
see, I was born in
December the 4th, 1926, while my brother was born
in December the 2nd, 1925. 26, I was 25, and he was
born in 26, just two days. And every time we get a
birthday, we are in the same week. You see, I'm the
fourth, he's the second, and I'm in the fourth.
Almost, you know, the same. Almost the same day.
The same day. Well, now, how did your father happen
to leave Mexico? Well, he, he, he, uh, He just
worked his way over here. He said because he had to
pay $18 for each passport. And there was my mother,
and my daddy, and my sister, they called him Alec,
and Raymond, and Luis, and Eileen, and Martin, and
Manuel. There was eight kids that come from
Mexico. Now, the other ones were born over here.
they were gone. And then my older sister, that's
the one that was, that passed away, and then there
was Manuel. And out of those, out of the bring from
Mexico, we still ate. Well, you said something
before about some people that wanted him to be
abandoned with them before he came. That was my
father-in-law. Your father-in-law? Oh, I
thought that was your father. No, my father, well,
my father, My father did say something about that,
too, because he said that people, after the
revolution, after they got through fighting and
everything come to normal, they didn't want to
work. Steel didn't want to work. They wanted to
steal and rob the other poor people. And they were
close to the soldiers, because they know how to
shoot. And my daddy, sometimes, he said, well,
that's one of the reasons I come to the United
States, because I was tired of the life they were
living, just sleeping on the rocks and shooting at
each other just like an animal. Let's put it that
way. We didn't even know when we were going to eat.
Sometimes we don't eat all day. We don't drink no
water. We have nothing. We just have to stay there.
Then my father said, I thought about it. If I got out
of the service, I'll come to the United States And
he was living in Piedras Negras, and then he moved
to Eagle Pass. When did he leave Mosques and come to
Piedras Negras? I think in 1925
that I was born. Right, the year you were born, he
moved to the border. To the border, close to the
border, because he said he was a... My daddy thinks
a lot of, what you call it, shepherds. He believes a
lot on those things because he was a milkman.
Before he entered the service and after he got out
of the service, he was a milkman. He had some little
goats and he delivered some milk. And he still
thinks that when he goes back, he will do that same
thing. He was a kind of shepherd. He always lived in
the woods or whatever you call it. He believes a lot
in those things. And then he said he sell wood. And
then he started thinking he ought to give his
family a chance. He didn't want them to live like he
did. And you know those Rocky Mountains and they
were no school or nothing. But still my daddy had a
good school. My grandma believes a lot in school
and they sent him to school. They sent him to school
in Moskos before the revolution. They had a good
school. And I had an uncle, I remember him as
Gregori. He had a good school. He was a good, well I
say good sport because he knew boxing and all that.
You know, they teach the boys all that and he was a
good, and then I remember my uncle coming to visit
us or to stay with us in 1932. And he asked my daddy,
well, what are you going to do with all this bunch of
kids you've got and they know how to read and write?
My daddy said, well, I have to work. I ain't got no
time to deal with the kids. He said, well, you give
them to me. He went and got those pencils. I think
you remember they were kind of a, well, I don't
know. They would make a little piece of wood, and
they had a little leg. He bought a lot of them and
started teaching us. I knew how to read and write in
Spanish when I was seven years old. And this was
your uncle who was living with you right then? And
he taught you how to read and write in Spanish? To
all the family. We didn't go to school, you know, to
public school until I was 10 years old, 1935. I was
10 years old. How many years did you go then? I went
about five years. But you'd had schooling in
Spanish before that. Yeah. Do you think that
helped you learn English? Well, in a way, yes. In a
way, I say yes, but you see, it was a little harder
for me because I had a little mixed up there because
I thought the same thing in Spanish was in English.
until I had to forget my Spanish and start in my
English. And it was, I tell the kids, I don't
suggest for nobody to know Spanish and then start
in English, because it's kind of a little hard
until you have to forget your Spanish and then
start in English. It's the same thing backwards.
If you know English first, it's hard to learn
Spanish. But, oh, I don't think I asked you, what
town did you live in or near in the Brazos Valley?
Well, Brian. It was right outside of Brian. Yeah.
Well, what you call the brass bottom, they call
here Mumford. The steel store, that's where I went
to school. Steel store and Mumford. Mumford.
Mumford. Both schools I attended. How did you
happen to come, or how did your father happen to
come here to Brian instead of staying on the
border? Let me see.
They said that we had an uncle before that. before
my dad, that he was already living here close to
Hearn in a farm. They call it Valley Johnson or
Goodland. They call it that farm. It's a big
plantation center. They call it Goodland. Well,
he happened to live there. So he said, I'm going to
send for my brother. They got a lot of kids to come
over here, and he can live here like a king. And I
think The way it looks, I think my uncle sent him
some money because he had to pay $18. For each one?
Each one, you know, to make the passport. And we all
got passports, and they cost $18 each one. And some
money to pay that station wagon that bought us.
Now, the station wagon in those days was what you
call it? It was just first class, like you come in a
greyhound. And my daddy said that. That man bought
also over there. And I guess my uncle paid him and
everything. So we settled right there in that
place. And I can remember the cotton. It must be, I
don't know what, it was on August. And I guess it was
close to, you know, the cotton was about that big or
something like that. Because I can remember, you
know, we still remember the farms and and a tree
that was there and everything. Your father was
actually working on the land that was owned by
somebody else. And then we moved to there. We moved
to this other place they called Scott. It's close
to this other side of the heart. And then we moved to
Mumford with this. This man that owns these
things, the seals, the seals own this place. And
then we owned with this man that he called himself
Bullet. But before that, those men, I know them.
But further down, I don't remember who was our
bosses or nothing. But I remember this one's over
here. And then we lived with the Escamados over
here in the bottom. The same Escamado, he was our
boss. And then we moved to another place they call
This, let's see, I don't remember the name.
Anyway, Ward, his name was Ward. He owns a huge land
from this river to the other river. But what
happened, he was not married man. He didn't have no
family. So we lived there. And that's where we went
to school, to steel store. We were staying in that
place with that man. He had a lot of farm, a lot of
farm. Well, when did your father and the rest of
your family move to Oklahoma? They moved in 1943.
In 1943. Why did they move to Oklahoma? Well, you
see, the beginning of the deal was this.
We were living in Wheelock. Well, you see, the
crops over there was not so good. So somebody that
went over there by the name of Martinez called, My
daddy said, if you want to bring a bunch of people to
pull some cotton, pick some cotton, we got a good
place over here. So we took a trip and we thought it
was good. And it was good and we thought it was the
Holy Land because everything over there was
going, you know, good. The cotton, they paid good
money and everything. And still they pay good
money over there in the state of Oklahoma. That's
the reason my daddy's black over there. And so the
boys did too, you know, because they don't work in
the cities, you know, they work on the farms. They
like to... They still work on the farms. On the
farms. And they thought the, you know, the job was
easier and better than here in Texas. So they
still, they were there. That's their reason
because they said they think they... crops was
better over there because they got an irrigation.
They make them good. Well did you all travel around
much when you were kids and pick crops or did you
just mostly stay in the Razzus Valley and pick? No,
we traveled a lot. We went to the state of Arkansas
and we went to Tennessee. Memphis, Tennessee. We
went over there to Arkansas and the state of
Louisiana and the state of Oklahoma and the state
of Texas. Yeah, we traveled. What was that like?
Did you enjoy it or did you dread it? How did you feel
about it? Well, I'll put it this way. I didn't like
it, but you see, as a family kid, I have to tango
along with them, but I didn't like it because I
thought it was not good to be sleeping on the truck
all the time and sleeping on it just like a tramp.
But I'll give you a thought about that. I said,
well, maybe when I get married, I'll settle down
and don't do this. But find out that I got married,
my husband started traveling. I said, well, you
better go yourself because I'm not going. But it
was a lot of fun, all right? You know, when you
forget about everything. It was a lot of fun when
you go with a lot of girls and boys in the truck and
just yell and jump off the truck and pull all day,
pull cotton. We thought it was fun. we got to be, you
know, well, we thought it was good. But then, now
that I, I don't think I ever want to repeat it again.
So there were things about it that were really very
good and fun and good memories and things that you
just wouldn't have to live through again. No, I
tell my husband, I say, if you want to go, you know,
places where you better go yourself. This trip
they took to Mexico. I say, I like to go there, I say,
but not Not that much, I said, because I got what you
call arthritis. And, you know, it's sitting on
your legs, on your feet, on your body. I said, for
arthritis, it's not good. You have to move,
exercise. He said, well, I stay with the kids. You
better go and enjoy yourself. Well, you have been
to Mexico, though. Yeah, I like it over there. I do.
But I didn't have no vacation. They have. Where do
you work? I work at the cashmere hatchery.
Cashmere hatchery at the hatchery. Oh, with the
baby chickens. Yeah, what do you do? Well, the
first step we do is to set the eggs for the, what you
call it, for the hatch. And then wait for the babies
to hatch. And then, you know, we got what you call a
setting every Monday and every Thursday. Every
Monday and every Thursday. and we have to pick them
out of the trays, count them, and then take to this
other place. Some sectors, they take the little
rooster and the little pullet, and then all the
pullets are in different boxes, and all the
roosters are in different boxes, and we have to
keep up with all those things. Can you really
separate them when they're that young? Yes,
because we got one... one kind of chickens that you
can tell which is which just by the wings. Oh,
that's an improvement over when I was growing up
and we just had to get the little chickens and wait
until they got big enough. Yeah, well, but this
kind of flock that our bosses are raising is
different from the others. You see, if you just get
the little wing and open the little wing and it's
made like a little fan. as a little puller. And if
you get another one and don't have any things like a
little fin or little white feathers, that's a
rooster. Well, now that's something I didn't know
about yet. That's fascinating. That's
interesting. It sure is. It's interesting. And I
wish more people would learn that, because they
pay you good money if you don't have to separate it.
And we got some sections, they call us, some
doctors from college. They can do that, but not all
the people. But they put it to us where we can do it.
Now it's got so easy that even us, we can get a box and
just pick a little chicken and just open the little
feather, I mean the little wing, and you can tell.
Well, now how many children do you have? I was a
mother of nine. Nine? Nine, but I raised five. I
lost four little boys. When they were babies? Yes,
they were babies. My first baby was a little boy,
and he died before he was born. Then I had a little
girl, and she didn't die. And then I had another
little boy, and he died. He was born at 2 o'clock,
and he died at 9 o'clock. And then I had another set
of twins, twin little boys, and they died because
they were born as a premature baby. So they were too
little, I said too little. And then I had another
little girl, she didn't die. And then I had another
one that didn't die, another one that didn't die,
and the little boy. and another little girl, and I
have five. They have one son that lives? Yeah, just
one. How old are your children now? Well, my oldest
girl, she's 27, and the other one is 22, and the
other one, she'll be 21, and my boy will be 17, and my
little girl will be 15. I've got a 14-year-old.
Well, what are your children doing now? Well, my
girls, my... My oldest girl, she's working at the
couch cafeteria at the bus station. She works
there. And my other girl, she lives in the state of
Oklahoma. She works in a factory. I guess it's made
by the government. I guess she's sewing or
something. Are either one of them married? Yeah,
both are married. Oh, they're both married. And
the other one is working at the Coca-Cola. And my
boy, he's in high school. And my little girl is in
junior high. Did your children graduate from high
school? Yes, two of them. The other one got to the
11th grade. And this is the one that is home. He's
handsome. This is the one that was talking to you a
while ago. And then my boy, he's in the 10th grade.
Yeah, he said he's going to finish. He's just two
more years. I got hopes that the other two will
graduate out of the five. They saw the two graduate
where I had four graduates and just one of the girls
there when she was 17. But she passed to the 11th
grade, but she didn't make it. Well, it sounds like
from what you're saying, going all the way back to
your grandmother, that education was important
in your family. Oh, yes. Do you know when they came
into the Muscus, I can't say it, area? Do you know
when your family originally came to Northern
Mexico? No, from over there? From further south?
No, I really don't know, but my mother was born in
Monclova. In Monclova. She told me that she was
married in Monclova, and I think that the That was
your mother or your grandmother? No, my mother.
Your mother was born in Mancova. But my
grandmother, my daddy, they were originally from
Musquis. The way they looked, the way they talked,
they lived there all the time. Maybe in their
little ranch or village or something, but the main
town was Musquis because all the papers are there
from Musquis. They don't call it Coahuila. They
call it Coahuila. I was just wondering, Coahuila
was settled in the 1600s. It was a long time ago.
When my son-in-law told me that he was going to take
me to my hometown. Have you been back to your
hometown? No, I haven't. Because, I don't know,
when we went to Mexico, we went to Laredo. But he
said, this time, all the time we go, we're going to
go through Iklupes, Piedras Negras, and then
Musques. He said, it's a beautiful town. I said,
well, maybe I'm planning to. I'm looking forward
to it.